README.md, before:

# gphoto2.cr

**gphoto2.cr** provides an FFI for common functions in [libgphoto2][gphoto].
It also includes a facade to interact with the library in a more idiomatic Crystal way.

## Installation

### Prerequisites

  * Crystal >= 0.18.4
  * libgphoto2 >= 2.5.0

To install the latest libgphoto2, you can use `homebrew` or `apt-get`, depending on the platform:

#### Mac OS X

```
$ brew install libgphoto2
```

#### Debian/Ubuntu

```
$ apt-get install libgphoto2-6 libgphoto2-dev libgphoto2-port10
```

### Shard

Add this to your application's `shard.yml`:

```yaml
dependencies:
  gphoto2:
    github: sija/gphoto2.cr
```

## Usage

```crystal
require "gphoto2"

# list available cameras
cameras = GPhoto2::Camera.all
# => [#<GPhoto2::Camera>, ...]

# list found cameras by model and port path
cameras.map { |c| [c.model, c.port] }
# => [["Nikon DSC D5100 (PTP mode)", "usb:250,006"], ...]

# use the first camera
camera = cameras.first

# ...or more conveniently
camera = GPhoto2::Camera.first

# search by model name
camera = GPhoto2::Camera.where(model: /nikon/i).first

# the above examples require the camera be manually closed when done
camera.close

# pass a block to automatically close the camera
GPhoto2::Camera.first do |camera|
  # ...
end

# check camera abilities (see `LibGPhoto2::CameraOperation`)
camera.can? :capture_image
# => true

# list camera configuration names
camera.config.keys
# => ["autofocusdrive", "manualfocusdrive", "controlmode", ...]

# read the current configuration value of an option
camera["expprogram"].value
# => "M"
camera["whitebalance"].value
# => "Automatic"

# list valid choices of a configuration option
camera["whitebalance"].choices
# => ["Automatic", "Daylight", "Fluorescent", "Tungsten", ...]

# check if the configuration has changed
camera.dirty?
# => false

# change camera configuration
camera["iso"] = 800
camera["f-number"] = "f/4.5"
camera["shutterspeed2"] = "1/30"

# check if the configuration has changed
camera.dirty?
# => true

# apply the new configuration to the device
camera.save

# alternatively, update the camera configuration in one go
camera.update({ iso: 200, shutterspeed2: "1/60", "f-number": "f/1.8" })

# take a photo
file = camera.capture

# ...and save it to the current working directory
file.save

# ...or to a specific pathname
file.save("/tmp/out.jpg")

# traverse the camera filesystem
folder = camera/"store_00010001/DCIM/100D5100"

# list files
files = folder.files
folder.files.map(&.name)
# => ["DSC_0001.JPG", "DSC_0002.JPG", ...]

# copy a file from the camera
file = files.first
file.save

# ...and then delete it from the camera
file.delete
```

More examples can be found in [`examples/`][examples].

[gphoto]: http://www.gphoto.org/
[examples]: https://github.com/Sija/gphoto2.cr/tree/master/examples

## Development

TODO: Write development instructions here

## Contributing

1. Fork it ( https://github.com/sija/gphoto2.cr/fork )
2. Create your feature branch (git checkout -b my-new-feature)
3. Commit your changes (git commit -am 'Add some feature')
4. Push to the branch (git push origin my-new-feature)
5. Create a new Pull Request

## Contributors

- [Sija](https://github.com/Sija) Sijawusz Pur Rahnama - creator, maintainer

Commit message:

Add note about generating documentation

README.md, after:

# gphoto2.cr

**gphoto2.cr** provides an FFI for common functions in [libgphoto2][gphoto].
It also includes a facade to interact with the library in a more idiomatic Crystal way.

## Installation

### Prerequisites

  * Crystal >= 0.18.4
  * libgphoto2 >= 2.5.0

To install the latest libgphoto2, you can use `homebrew` or `apt-get`, depending on the platform:

#### Mac OS X

```
$ brew install libgphoto2
```

#### Debian/Ubuntu

```
$ apt-get install libgphoto2-6 libgphoto2-dev libgphoto2-port10
```

### Shard

Add this to your application's `shard.yml`:

```yaml
dependencies:
  gphoto2:
    github: sija/gphoto2.cr
```

## Usage

```crystal
require "gphoto2"

# list available cameras
cameras = GPhoto2::Camera.all
# => [#<GPhoto2::Camera>, ...]

# list found cameras by model and port path
cameras.map { |c| [c.model, c.port] }
# => [["Nikon DSC D5100 (PTP mode)", "usb:250,006"], ...]

# use the first camera
camera = cameras.first

# ...or more conveniently
camera = GPhoto2::Camera.first

# search by model name
camera = GPhoto2::Camera.where(model: /nikon/i).first

# the above examples require the camera be manually closed when done
camera.close

# pass a block to automatically close the camera
GPhoto2::Camera.first do |camera|
  # ...
end

# check camera abilities (see `LibGPhoto2::CameraOperation`)
camera.can? :capture_image
# => true

# list camera configuration names
camera.config.keys
# => ["autofocusdrive", "manualfocusdrive", "controlmode", ...]

# read the current configuration value of an option
camera["expprogram"].value
# => "M"
camera["whitebalance"].value
# => "Automatic"

# list valid choices of a configuration option
camera["whitebalance"].choices
# => ["Automatic", "Daylight", "Fluorescent", "Tungsten", ...]

# check if the configuration has changed
camera.dirty?
# => false

# change camera configuration
camera["iso"] = 800
camera["f-number"] = "f/4.5"
camera["shutterspeed2"] = "1/30"

# check if the configuration has changed
camera.dirty?
# => true

# apply the new configuration to the device
camera.save

# alternatively, update the camera configuration in one go
camera.update({ iso: 200, shutterspeed2: "1/60", "f-number": "f/1.8" })

# take a photo
file = camera.capture

# ...and save it to the current working directory
file.save

# ...or to a specific pathname
file.save("/tmp/out.jpg")

# traverse the camera filesystem
folder = camera/"store_00010001/DCIM/100D5100"

# list files
files = folder.files
folder.files.map(&.name)
# => ["DSC_0001.JPG", "DSC_0002.JPG", ...]

# copy a file from the camera
file = files.first
file.save

# ...and then delete it from the camera
file.delete
```

More examples can be found in [`examples/`][examples]. Documentation can be generated using `crystal doc` task.

[gphoto]: http://www.gphoto.org/
[examples]: https://github.com/Sija/gphoto2.cr/tree/master/examples

## Development

TODO: Write development instructions here

## Contributing

1. Fork it ( https://github.com/sija/gphoto2.cr/fork )
2. Create your feature branch (git checkout -b my-new-feature)
3. Commit your changes (git commit -am 'Add some feature')
4. Push to the branch (git push origin my-new-feature)
5. Create a new Pull Request

## Contributors

- [Sija](https://github.com/Sija) Sijawusz Pur Rahnama - creator, maintainer
